[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
To truly access
our full capacity
requires that we retrain and
rewire our nervous system
for more optimal functioning.
To get a better feel for this,
let's use a computer analogy.
Imagine for a moment that
the hardware of a computer
is like the body.
Its circuitry and wiring are
akin to the nervous system.
Its main processing
chip is like our brain.
And now imagine that the
operating system and software,
with all its application
and data files,
is equivalent to our
individual mind and soul.
Meanwhile, the user is our
spirit or higher intelligence,
which is connected to
the mind of the all.
In other words,
our mind and soul
function as the interface
or mediator between the body
and the spirit.
If our software, a.k.a.
our mind, has bugs or
faulty programming,
then we're going
to have problems.
This means that our
goal is twofold.
First, to debug the programming
of the mind, and second,
to optimize the circuitry of the
brain and neurological system.
Only then will we be able to
expand our conscious awareness
of who and what we truly are.
As spiritual beings
having a physical life,
rather than thinking
of ourselves
as physical beings first who
are now on a spiritual journey.
Let's remember that we are
spirit first and foremost.
And we are here to live a
fully awakened physical life.
In this episode, we
begin diving into how
we can rewire our brain
and nervous system
for more optimal functioning
in this experience of life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
How is it even possible to
rewire our system as adults?
It's possible
because of something
called neuroplasticity.
This exciting
discovery was actually
made by neuroscientists
starting as early as the 1800s.
Prior to that time, it was
believed that the brain
was hardwired by the age of 25.
But since the '70s,
scientists have
continued to discover just
how adaptable our brain
and nervous system really are.
They found that
our neural wiring
is malleable throughout
our lifetime.
This is what
neuroplasticity means.
Even though the deeper
core wiring of the brain
may be set by the age
of 25, the good news
is that we can still
redirect and rewire it
through our choices, our
attitudes, and our actions.
How does this work?
When we read most
books or articles
that discuss rewiring
our brain, they typically
emphasize a few key things.
Number one, focused
attention, such as when
we take on a
challenging new task,
like learning a new language
or a musical instrument.
The second thing is
repetition and practice,
making it into a
daily habit that we
integrate as part of our life.
Research has shown
that it's only
after about 90 to 144
straight days of practice
that a new behavior becomes
more firmly wired in.
Until then, it takes motivation,
willpower, discipline,
and self-control
to follow through
on achieving that new
skill or behavior.
Another thing we need is
the right environment,
one that is conducive
to learning and change.
The right environment
includes things
like having supportive and
harmonious relationships,
good physical health,
and the ability to relax.
If we're too stressed, our brain
kicks into its fight or flight
survival mode, and it defaults
to old neural patterns.
Let's explore now how we can
take this deeper so that we
can truly attain self mastery.
Our intention with this is
to expand our consciousness,
access those
transcendent states,
and harness our
greater capacity.
We start with the
part of our brain
that we have the most
conscious control of--
namely, the prefrontal cortex.
This part of the brain
that scientists call
"our executive control center."
This area is highly connected
to the other brain regions.
Thus, it can govern them
through top down processing.
It oversees our decision making,
control over our impulses,
and it gives us the ability
to act with intention.
The prefrontals sit right behind
the forehead and a little bit
up from there, coinciding with
the front part of the crown
and forehead head area.
How we can use this
knowledge of its location
is by tapping on this area to
stimulate it in a rhythmic way.
For example, tapping the third
eye or just above the eyebrows
or even up in the hairline
can stimulate our prefrontals.
So when and how does our
prefrontal cortex develop?
Well, it turns out that this
is actually the last part
of the brain to develop.
That's because it's the most
recent addition to the brain's
evolution on Earth.
Now it happens in two
stages of human growth.
The first stage occurs
from birth to age 15.
This primary stage of
prefrontal development
happens in parallel with the
rest of the brain structures.
Now because of this, it
becomes highly connected to all
the other brain regions.
The extent of this
connectivity and functionality
depends on our experiences,
our environment,
and our social interactions
during our developmental years.
The early wiring
in our prefrontals
is crucial to us, becoming
balanced, well-adjusted adults.
Now, the second
phase of development
continues from age 15 to 25.
And at this stage,
the early connections
have become more
deeply rooted, but now
the prefrontal themselves
continue to grow and develop
more abstract capabilities.
It's only in our teen
and early adult years
that we become able
to reason with more
complexity and forethought.
This is why proper education
is so important at this time.
Now what else are our
prefrontals in charge of?
In short, they orchestrate
the rest of the brain,
connecting into all the
other regions and layers.
Connecting into the
cerebral cortex,
then down into
the limbic system,
and down even into
the old brain.
And while the driving
force of our will
comes through the mind with
our goals, our intentions,
and choices, it is
our prefrontal cortex
that orchestrates the
brain-body system.
So what's the key to
specifically rewiring
the prefrontals?
It has to do with what is known
as hemispheric transfer, which
relates to the fact that we have
two hemispheres in the brain--
the right and the left lobes.
While they look
similar, evolution
has developed them into two
distinct processing styles.
These two hemispheres
have sometimes
been described as
a team of rivals,
processing the world through
dual streams of attention.
They perceive in
very different ways.
In our left hemisphere tends
to be more linear, logical,
structured, and detail-oriented.
Our right hemispheres more big
picture, gestalt, creative,
and artistic.
It's the side of
us that connects
more to nature and
relationships and having fun.
And while we may think
of these two hemispheres
as polar opposites,
the truth is that they
are meant to work together
for a whole brain experience.
Both the right and
left modes of operation
are necessary for becoming
a balanced and well-adjusted
person.
But unfortunately,
most people tend
to have imbalances between
these two hemispheres,
with one dominating
over the other.
And in Western society, we
tend to put much more emphasis
on the left brain
way of doing things.
As a result, our modern world
has become very left brain
dominant.
Values like reason,
logic, science, IQ,
being organized and disciplined
and thinking rationally
tend to be more emphasized
in society today.
These have been placed
above the more right brain
qualities of EQ, nurturing,
artistic expression, empathy,
intuition.
And because of this,
we live in a world
that currently places less
value or emphasis on whole brain
development.
Fortunately, this is
starting to change again,
but it's taking
time for the shift
to really reach our
societal institutions,
like our education system.
Our education system has been on
a trend of cutting out the art
and music programs, while
emphasizing math, science,
and standardized testing.
This leads to an unbalanced
programming and wiring
of our brains from the moment
that we enter grade school.
The ideal is not to be right
or left brain dominant,
but to be whole brain.
Between the two
hemispheres is a wide band
of nerve fibers known
as the corpus callosum.
What we want is to have
good connectivity here.
And there are methods
we can use to develop
a more balanced and
connected whole brain.
In Kabbalah, this is
equivalent to balancing
the two pillars of mercy and
severity on the tree of life.
What this means is that we
have to work on ourselves
to achieve that balance.
It's not going to
happen if we just
keep doing things how
we've always done them.
In our present state,
we experience life
through a set of
filters, and we tend
to default to relying
on our strengths,
while avoiding our
weaknesses But this only
reinforces the imbalance.
If we want to bring
balance, we have
to choose to stimulate
the brain in new ways.
We can create new
neural connections
to strengthen the areas
we're not as strong in.
Working on our weaknesses
to bring them up
to the same level
as our strengths.
This balances and
builds the bridges
between the two hemispheres.
Our prefrontals are what give
us humans the ability to engage
with the world.
And because of it, we have
become a powerful species.
It is what gives us the
ability to act upon our ideals,
rather than just our
animal instincts.
One author and psychologist,
Iain McGilchrist,
explores this relationship
between the two hemispheres
extensively in his book, "The
Master and His Emissary."
McGilchrist sums up the
prefrontal and their defining
role in the human experience.
He said, it made us the most
powerful and destructive
animals.
It has also turned us
into the social animal
and into an animal with
a spiritual dimension.
Now, the reason that the
prefrontals are the gateway
is because by intentionally
stimulating this area,
it automatically sends signals
to the rest of the brain
and nervous system.
This aids us in developing
stronger neural connections
throughout the brain.
And in addition, by using
methods such as meditation
to expand consciousness,
we can also
access transcendent states.
So how does this work?
Well, the general motto is, what
fires together wires together.
This is how our neural
pathways are built.
When a stimulus comes
in, it triggers a feeling
in the body, which then
triggers a response that
is based either on our ego's
desires or our body's needs.
This ultimately then leads
to a thought pattern.
All of this is firing
off neurons in the brain.
And the more certain triggers
and patterns fire together,
the more the neural pathway
is built or reinforced.
When repeated enough,
this creates strong wiring
along that pathway.
And through
repetition, information
is exchanged across
the synaptic gaps.
And the more the synapses
exchange information,
the more they then rearrange
to move closer together.
This allows for greater ease
of information exchange,
and this is true for
both our positive wiring
and our negative wiring.
Meaning our good habits
and our bad habits.
The more we access a
certain pattern or emotion,
the stronger that connection
becomes, making it easier
to continue accessing.
So what can we do when we
have a negative pattern?
If our brain has wiring towards
negativity or unhealthy default
patterns, we can rewire
it to more positive ones.
First, we must identify
what we want to replace
the negative tendency with.
Have a strategy in place for the
new pattern or thought process
that we want to reinforce.
For example, if we tend to
be pessimistic or judgmental
about ourselves or
the world, we can
choose to replace it with
an attitude of gratitude
and acceptance.
Then, start listing the things
that we are grateful for.
The second thing is that we
must catch ourselves in the act.
When we find ourselves
in an old pattern,
we have to interrupt
it and redirect
to the more positive wiring
that we wish to implement.
When a pattern is
repeatedly interrupted,
the synapses stop
firing together.
And in time, they
disconnect the old pathway.
So first, be prepared for what
you are going to do, and then
do it any time
you catch yourself
in that old negative
pattern or thought.
This is how we
replace the old habits
with new, more supportive ones.
We want to be
intentional about it.
It will take some effort.
Rewiring and instilling
new behaviors and skills
takes practice,
focus, and energy.
We must repeat and repeat
over and over again,
interrupting that
old pattern and then
replacing it with a new one.
Through that dedication,
consistency, and willpower,
we make the shift.
At some point, once it's
been reinforced sufficiently,
it then becomes an
integrated pattern or habit.
We are, after all,
creatures of habit.
It's part of our nature.
Let's just be conscious and
intentional about those habits.
Rather than operating through
our programming or default
coping strategies to determine
how we react to life,
we can become proactive
to build habits
that support us in achieving
our full potential.
This strategy is where we
start the process of mastering
our own body's wiring.
As we rewire, we
enhance our ability
to access our full potential
and build a stronger foundation
to live from.
It takes effort to live
consciously and intentionally.
But at some point,
it gels, becoming
an automatic way of life.
Much of this happens
through having
a daily spiritual practice,
whether that practice
is meditation, yoga,
qigong, prayer, or rituals.
In the mystery
school traditions,
we make a pattern of
living that includes
daily rituals to establish a
flow of energy through our day.
This includes meditation
to quiet the neural firings
and bring in a higher level
of spiritual awareness.
And when the mind is
quiet, we can then
begin to fire new neural
circuits that relate
to higher spiritual impulses.
Remember, our brain is a
receiver, processing input
from vibrational energies.
By understanding
how this operates,
we can intentionally use
the right vibrational inputs
to stimulate our brain
in a harmonious way.
One way to do this is by working
with brainwave entrainment
methods.
To understand how
these tools work,
let's first explore what
brainwaves really are.
The neural networks
of the brain oscillate
as they fire together.
Brainwaves are synchronized
neural oscillations.
They're not just about
a single neuron firing
across the synapse, but
groupings of neurons
firing together in a network.
And this creates
a chain reaction
of firings between all
of the neural pathways
that are connected.
The result is a
wave pattern that
flows through the connected
sections of the brain.
And these neural oscillations
can range between frequencies
of 0, up to 100 Hertz.
The deepest brainwave
state is called
delta, which vibrates
between 0.1 to 3 Hertz.
And this state
usually corresponds
to really deep, slow
wave sleep, one in which
we're not dreaming.
When in a delta, we're
typically unconscious.
A delta state allows for
the pruning of our neurons
and synaptic connections that
are not being used anymore.
So a good night's sleep
is essential for the brain
to have its opportunity
to clean up.
Next is the theta brainwave
state, just above delta,
which isolates between 3 to
8 Hertz or beats per second.
Theta is a deep
meditative state,
and it rests at
the border between
conscious and unconscious.
This is the brainwave level that
we want to access and sustain
while in meditation.
Typically, without a
strong meditation practice
though, we only experience theta
during that brief transition
between waking and sleeping.
And while in theta, we
may experience colors,
shapes, images flashing
through our mind's eye.
It's a dreamy state, where the
ego mind is out of the way,
and yet, we still maintain
some level of awareness.
What about using activities
like yoga, tai chi, or qigong.
Typically, these
more active methods
are good tools for getting into
an alpha state, but not a theta
state.
Alpha brainwaves, which
oscillate between 8 to 13
Hertz, they're good too.
They help to relieve stress
and bring relaxation.
Things like light
meditation, guided imageries,
a relaxing shower,
and daydreaming
all tend to put us
into an alpha state.
Here, we can be tuned into
guidance and spiritual
awareness, while still
having our mind engaged
and being aware of
the outer world.
But that also means that the
ego can still engage as well.
Only in the deeper
theta and delta
states is the ego
out of the way.
The deeper we go,
the more we feel
connected to the universal
mind, and our sense of self
dissolves, and we become
one with all that is.
How about the higher
brainwave states?
Between 13 to 32 Hertz
is what we call beta.
This is actually our
typical waking state,
where we're engaged
with the outside world.
Beta is when we're more
alert and actively focusing
on the things that
are external to us.
The good thing about
beta is that when
we want to learn new information
from an outside source,
it helps us to be in a
harmonized beta state.
And unfortunately, in
our world today, we
tend to operate in an
unbalanced beta state,
with too many chaotic
inputs stimulating us
from the outside.
When we learn to
harmonize the hemispheres
and access a whole
brain beta state,
that is when new information can
come in and really take root.
And this allows us to retain
the information better.
Now finally, there's also
higher range, the gamma range,
between 32 to 100 Hertz.
These are the highest
brainwave levels
that neuroscientists
have been able to detect
within our brains.
The main peak of the gamma waves
tends to be around 40 Hertz.
What's fascinating about
this 40 Hertz range
is that it has been associated
with peak creativity
and performance, as well
as visual processing
and what we call the unity
of conscious perception.
We reach these peak states
in times of elation,
mystical transcendence, and
when we're really in the zone.
How do we intentionally
stimulate our brain
to create these
harmonized states
without having 20 years of
deep meditation practice?
The keys to doing so rests in
the principles of vibration,
resonance, and entrainment.
At the neuronal
level, brainwaves
are a form of
rhythmic oscillation.
But such oscillations
require a stimulus.
Without the stimulus,
the oscillations
will dampen and lose
their coherence.
That is, unless we introduce a
rhythmic push to keep it going.
Think of like when we
push a child on a swing.
The push gives it more energy to
overcome any dampening effects.
It keeps the swing
going, so long
as we keep pushing
in the right rhythm.
This is an example
of a resonant system.
We can use the same principle to
intentionally bring in stimuli
to help us entrain and sustain
the desired brainwave patterns.
This is the basis of
all neurotechnologies.
They use various harmonic
energy sources as stimulation.
Developers are experimenting
with all manner of ways
to biohack our brains right now.
Such devices might
include techniques
like pulsed LED lights
or tapping on the nerves
and meridians or using sound
and music and binaural beats,
as well as biofeedback.
By introducing these stimuli
to activate our five senses,
we can entrain our brain
into the desired states.
But, we must be
sure to stimulate
in a harmonious and synchronized
way, not a chaotic or overly
forceful way.
We can use such
oscillatory energies
to rebuild the proper
connectivity in our brain
for more optimal functioning.
Let's go back to
the corpus callosum.
What are the best methods for
creating greater connectivity
and balance here at
this part of the brain?
One simple exercise is
combining music and movement
that equally engages the
left and right sides.
It can be as simple as
putting on some good music
while going for a
brisk walk or run,
but be sure to have nothing in
your hands and swing your arms
as you walk or run.
This cross lateral
movement automatically
harmonizes the left
and right hemispheres.
Music also naturally engages
both hemispheres of the brain.
But the type of music we choose
to listen to is important.
When it comes to equally
harmonizing the brain,
selecting music without
lyrics or chants is important.
And the reason for that is
that lyrics put extra emphasis
into language centers of
the brain and the left side.
And in regular
situations, that's fine.
But when it comes to
achieving whole brain states,
it's best to use music
without language in it.
Another exercise that
we can do to balance
the hemispheres of the brain
is more of a visual process.
This one is an open
eye meditation,
focusing on a mandala with
balanced and symmetric
geometries.
When meditating on a mandala,
focus on the center point
or the balance points.
After connecting to it strongly
with the eyes open, eventually,
we then take it inward
and reconstruct it inside.
All of these
exercises will really
support this rewiring,
especially the prefrontals
and the corpus callosum, for a
more balanced and whole brain
state.
As we build a stronger
connection between the mind
and the brain, and as we
balance the two hemispheres
for optimal functioning,
we gain more authority
over our brain and body system.
And with this, we then
have greater ability
to master ourselves and
this vehicle of the body.
Mastering our
thoughts and emotions
is also essential
if we want to step
into our next phase
of human evolution
and become more fully
realized beings.
Join me again as we
discover how to unlock even
more of our brain's potential.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for
exploring the mysteries
of our human potential with
me in this episode of "Mystery
Teachings."
[MUSIC PLAYING]